Make a planning application
This Section covers:

What you need to send with your application
How to make an application?
How much will it cost and how do I pay?
Downloadable forms
Application for modification and discharge of planning agreements / obligations

What you need to send with your application
It is important that all planning forms are sent with the correct documents and fee.  There are minimum national requirements for standard applications.  Guidance can be found in validation requirements.

How to make an application?
We encourage you to submit your planning applications online via Planning Application Wales.  If you are unsure of which application form you require visit our things to consider before you apply section.

You can also print an application form and send it to us.  Please see below.

How much will it cost?
The cost of applying for planning permission depends on what type of work you want to do. 

Download our latest fees 

How to pay
You will need to pay the required fee before we can start processing your application.
 

Reference your payment: If you applied online please quote the reference number you were given on submission. If you did not apply online, please reference the payment with the full name of the applicant.
Paying online is easy and secure. The cards we accept are Maestro UK, MasterCard Debit, Visa Debit (Delta, Electron), Visa Credit and MasterCard Credit.

NB.  Please read this guidance note for paying online

Pay online  
BACS Payment:  ​You will need the following details:

our bank account number 93455750
our sort code 20-10-42
​our account name is "Caerphilly County Borough Council"
please reference your payment. We also ask that you email us at planning@caerphilly.gov.uk to let us know that you have made the payment.

In person by visiting our offices 

opening hours are Monday – Thursday 08.30am until 04.30pm.

By post 

payments must be by crossed cheque or postal order made payable to ‘Caerphilly County Borough Council’ (post-dated cheques are not acceptable). Please reference your payment on the back of your cheque or postal order. 

Please do not send cash in the post.

Download planning forms
We would always recommend that you apply online.  But, you can download the standard forms from the Planning Portal and send them to us by post to the address below.

Download paper forms

Application for modification and discharge of planning agreements / obligations
For applications to the Local Planning Authority to modify or discharge a planning agreement/ obligation pursuant to section 52 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1971 or Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, please complete the attached application form. 

Privacy notice - planning application processing (PDF)

Planning Division
Tredomen House
Tredomen Park
Ystrad Mynach
Hengoed
CF82 7WF