Things to consider before you apply for planning permission
This Section covers:

Different types of applications
Things to consider before you apply
Information about building control and other factors that might affect your application
Different types of applications
There are various types of application forms and it is important to submit the right one, otherwise it could delay your building project.

Householder permission - used for projects that alters or enlarges a single house, including works within the boundary/garden of a house, such as extensions, conservatories and garages.

Full planning permission - used for most projects, excluding householder projects, such as building a new house or a change of use.

Outline planning permission - used to check whether the scale and nature of a building project is acceptable, before a detailed proposal is put forward.  Once an outline application is approved, you will need to apply for the “reserved matters”.​

Reserved matters - if an outline application has been approved, you have three years to provide the details.  This will typically include information about the layout, access, scale and appearance of the development.

Listed building consent - used for projects on listed buildings.  To find out more visit our listed buildings page.

Advertisement consent - used for projects that displays an advertisement or sign, such as fascia signs and projecting signs.

Removal/variation of conditions - used to remove or vary a condition imposed after planning permission has been approved.

Discharge of conditions - used where a condition, on a planning consent or a listed building consent, requires more information on a specific aspect of the project that was not described in the original application.  This information may need to be submitted for approval before works can start.  Sometimes they have to be submitted at a set time, either before works start or before the new development can be used or occupied.  Please read any conditions carefully.

Prior approvals/notifications - used for proposals involving telecommunications, demolition, agriculture or forestry.  Notification of these propsoals are provided before they take place.

Tree Preservation Orders - used for building projects that involves trees or works to trees, which have been protected by a Tree Preservation Order.

Notification of proposed works to trees in a conservation area - used for works to trees in a conservation area where works to trees of a specific size are affected.

Non-material amendments - used when planning permission is approved but requires a small amendment.

Conservation area consent - used for demolition in a conservation area.  To find out more visit our conservation areas section.
Visit the planning portal for more details of the different types of consents.

Things to consider before you apply
Building Control
You will probably need building control approval as it is different to planning permission.

The regulations in building control set standards for the design and construction of a building to ensure the safety and health of the people using it.  Whereas planning guides the way that our towns and countryside develop.

An easy way to remember the difference is that building control relates to the inside of a building and planning relates to the outside and how it fits into the surrounding area.

Visit our building control pages to find out more.

Design and access statements
Many planning applications and applications for listed building consent that have design implications including applications for new or extended buildings and infrastructure will require a Design and Access Statement (DAS). Further details are in our design and access statement section.

Is your project liable for CIL?
The Community Infrastructure Levy (called 'the levy' or 'CIL') allows local planning authorities to raise funds from developers who are undertaking new building projects in their area. The funds raised go towards infrastructure that is needed to support growth, such as schools and transport improvements.

Not all developments are liable for CIL. For further details visit our planning applications liable for CIL section.

Coal mining searches
All planning applications should be accompanied by a 'Development Stability Report' where appropriate. To find out if one is needed for your site, visit The Coal Authority website. If one is needed, advice is available on the website on how to obtain one.

Having obtained the report, you should then consider whether you need a 'Coal Mining Risk Assessment', which is the document that assesses the impact of any former mining activity on your development, and contains any appropriate mitigation measures.

We will not be able to determine your application until those matters have been properly addressed.

Other factors might affect your building project

Even if your work is granted planning permission or is covered by permitted development, you may still require additional permissions for the work you are planning.  

Who owns the building, fence or land?
We don’t hold land ownership records but you can check the Land Registry’s website.

Search the Land Registry website

Do you have a listed building?
A listed building is a building, object of structure that is declared to be of national importance in terms of architectural or historic interest.

Check if your property is a listed building

Do you live in a conservation area?
A conservation area is an area of environmental or historical importance which is protected by law.  Some type of work that doesn’t require permission outside a conservation area might need permission inside of it.

Check if your property is in a conservation area

Are you building sustainable drainage (SuDs)?
From 7 January 2019, all new developments of more than one house or where the construction area is of 100m2 or more will require sustainable drainage to manage on-site surface water. 

SAB approval is different and separate to planning permission and both must be sought before any construction can begin.

Visit our SAB pages to find out more 

Does that tree have a tree preservation order?
A tree preservation order (TPO) is designed to protect specific trees or a particular area from damage and destruction.  You will need consent to carry out works to a tree if it is protected.

Read about TPOs

Do you have a party wall?
A party wall is when some or all of your property is connected to the boundary of land belonging to two (or more) different owners.  

You must let the different owners know if you are about to start a building project.

Owners can agree or disagree with what you propose.

Read more about party walls on the planning portal

Is your property in a flood zone?
Flood zones are divided into areas based on the probability of that area flooding.

Check National Resources Wales website for more information

Other things that might affect your property
You should also check for the following before you start work:

ancient monuments
covenants and Private rights
licensed sites
protected species
rights of way
Read more about these on the Planning Portal   