Planning can seem a bit daunting when you are new to it. Please visit the Planning Portal Wales site that will guide you through the process.

Top tips for Planning Portal Wales
Step 1
Visit the common projects section on the Planning Portal Wales, you will find examples and guidance of common projects. It will also advise if you are covered by permitted development rights, or require planning permission.

Step 2
Is the work you are proposing covered by Permitted Development rights, this often covers minor changes to your property.

Step 3
If covered by Permitted development rights decide if you need to apply for a Lawful development certificate (optional, however strongly recommended - may affect the sale of your property).

Step 4 
If Permission is required, then please apply for planning permission. If you need help with this, we offer a pre-planning application service, that aims to make the process easier for you.

Step 5
Is your project liable for Community Infrastructure Levy? To find out more about the CIL and how it may apply to your project please visit Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) website.

Step 6
Do you need to apply for building regulations? It focuses on the technical side such as making sure the building regulations are upheld and public safety is maintained. Most planning applications require building control approval

Step 7
Do you need to apply for Sustainable Drainage Approval. All developments of more than one house, or a construction area of 100m2 or more will be affected.

Pre-application advice service
If you know you need planning permission, but would like specific advice about your project, you can use our Pre-planning application service.

Still not sure if you need planning permission
If you are still unsure whether you need planning permission, you can apply for a Lawful Development Certificate which is a formal decision as to whether permission is required.  Further details can be found on the Planning Portal.

With all building work, the owner of the property (or land) in question is ultimately responsible for complying with the relevant planning rules and building regulations. The local authority does not give informal advice on whether planning permission is required. This is the owners responsibility to determine.